

--- PAGE 1 ---
FINAL EXAMINATION — VERSION B
DevOps, IaC, Kubernetes & Web Application Security
Date: May 14, 2026   |   Duration: 3 Hours   |   Total Marks: 100
Instructions: Answer ALL questions. Part A contains 20 MCQs (40 marks). Part B contains 12
short-answer questions (60 marks). Be precise — full marks require specific terminology, not vague
descriptions. Code identifiers, command names, and configuration keys must be spelled correctly.
PART A — MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS (40 marks · 2 marks
each)
1. In a Dockerfile, which instruction sets the working directory inside the container
for subsequent RUN, CMD, COPY, and ENTRYPOINT instructions?
A) CHDIR
B) WORKDIR
C) SETDIR
D) PATH
2. A Pod manifest declares kind: Pod and apiVersion: v1. Inside
spec.containers, you set image: nginx:latest. What does :latest guarantee?
A) The most recent stable production release
B) The image tagged 'latest' in the registry — not necessarily the newest version
C) The image will auto-update whenever a new version exists
D) The image is digitally signed by Docker
3. In Terraform, a variable declared with sensitive = true will:
A) Encrypt the variable value in the state file
B) Prevent the value from being logged during plan and apply
C) Block the variable from being set via the CLI
D) Require multi-factor authentication to apply changes
4. A Kubernetes Service of type NodePort exposes the service on each Worker Node
within which port range by default?
A) 1024–8080
B) 8000–9000
C) 30000–32767
D) 80–443
5. Which OWASP vulnerability is BEST illustrated by injecting & ping -c 10
attacker.com & into a parameter that gets passed to a shell command?
A) SQL Injection
B) Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
C) OS Command Injection
D) Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF)


--- PAGE 2 ---
6. In the OWASP Password Storage Cheat Sheet, what is the PRIMARY purpose of a
salt?
A) Make hashes harder to compute (slower)
B) Encrypt the password reversibly
C) Ensure identical passwords produce different hashes, defeating precomputed (rainbow) tables
D) Reduce the size of stored hashes
7. Terraform's aws_launch_configuration resource has a known limitation that
motivates a specific lifecycle pattern. Which one?
A) It cannot reference variables
B) Launch configurations are immutable; replacing one referenced by an ASG requires
create_before_destroy
C) It does not support tags, so it must use ignore_changes
D) It cannot be used with t2.micro instance types
8. Which Kubernetes component on the control plane assigns newly created Pods to
Worker Nodes?
A) kubelet
B) kube-proxy
C) Scheduler
D) Controller Manager
9. In Terraform, the syntax data.aws_vpc.default.id refers to:
A) The ID attribute of a resource named 'default' of type aws_vpc
B) The ID attribute of a data source named 'default' of type aws_vpc
C) A module output called default.id
D) A local variable defined in defaults.tf
10. An attacker submits filename=../../../etc/passwd in a URL parameter and
successfully reads the file. This is an example of:
A) SSRF
B) Path Traversal (Directory Traversal)
C) File Upload Vulnerability
D) Open Redirect
11. Which Kubernetes object is responsible for ensuring a stable set of pod replicas
is running at any given time, by monitoring desired vs. current state?
A) DaemonSet
B) StatefulSet
C) ReplicaSet
D) Job
12. A Terraform backend configured for S3 with a DynamoDB table serves two
purposes. Which pair is correct?


--- PAGE 3 ---
A) Compute caching and credential storage
B) Remote state storage (S3) and state locking (DynamoDB)
C) Log aggregation (S3) and metrics (DynamoDB)
D) Module registry (S3) and provider cache (DynamoDB)
13. In a CI/CD pipeline, the distinction between Continuous Delivery and Continuous
Deployment is:
A) Delivery uses Docker; Deployment uses Kubernetes
B) Delivery requires manual approval to release to production; Deployment releases automatically
C) Delivery is for backend; Deployment is for frontend
D) They are synonymous and interchangeable
14. A Kubernetes Secret stores sensitive values. By default, the data in a Secret
manifest is:
A) Encrypted with AES-256
B) Encrypted with the cluster's TLS private key
C) Base64 encoded (NOT encrypted)
D) Stored as plain text
15. Which Terraform expression correctly references the public IP of an EC2 instance
resource named 'web' in an output block?
A) ${resource.aws_instance.web.public_ip}
B) aws_instance.web.public_ip
C) var.aws_instance.web.public_ip
D) data.aws_instance.web.public_ip
16. In Cross-Site Scripting (XSS), the attacker's malicious script runs in the victim's
browser. Why is the script trusted by the browser?
A) The browser trusts all JavaScript by default
B) The script came from a website the user has visited before
C) The script appears to originate from the trusted target website's domain
D) Browsers cannot detect malicious code
17. Which of these is NOT a Kubernetes health-check probe type?
A) Liveness probe
B) Readiness probe
C) Startup probe
D) Heartbeat probe
18. Why is Docker fundamentally lighter than a Virtual Machine on the same host?
A) Docker images are always smaller than 100 MB
B) Containers share the host OS kernel; VMs each run a full guest OS
C) Docker uses GPU acceleration
D) VMs cannot run Linux


--- PAGE 4 ---
19. In Terraform, the terraform init command primarily does which of the
following?
A) Applies the infrastructure changes
B) Downloads provider plugins and initializes the backend
C) Destroys the existing infrastructure
D) Validates the syntax of .tf files only
20. An application checks access permissions in an upstream component (e.g.,
reverse proxy), but the backend service trusts any request from 127.0.0.1. An
attacker exploits this trust by forcing the server to make a request to its own admin
endpoint. This attack is:
A) Broken Access Control via SSRF
B) Session Hijacking
C) CSRF (Cross-Site Request Forgery)
D) DNS poisoning


--- PAGE 5 ---
PART B — SHORT ANSWER QUESTIONS (60 marks · 5 marks each)
Keep answers concise. 3–6 sentences each, unless code is requested.
1. Given this Dockerfile snippet, identify TWO mistakes and explain how to fix each:
FROM python:3.11-slim
COPY . .
RUN pip install -r requirements.txt
WORKDIR /app
CMD python app.py
[5 marks]
2. A developer claims: "Our CI pipeline runs unit tests on every commit, so we have
CI/CD." Is this statement accurate? Explain what is missing for true CI/CD and define
the boundary between CI, Continuous Delivery, and Continuous Deployment.
[5 marks]
3. Describe what happens, step by step, when you run kubectl apply -f
deployment.yaml for a new Deployment with replicas: 3. Mention at least the API
server, etcd, scheduler, and kubelet roles.
[5 marks]
4. Explain the DRY violation in the following Terraform snippet and rewrite it correctly
using a variable:
resource "aws_security_group" "sg" {
  ingress { from_port = 8080; to_port = 8080; ... }
}
resource "aws_instance" "web" {
  user_data = "busybox httpd -p 8080"
}
[5 marks]
5. An attacker injects ' OR '1'='1' -- into a login form's username field. Show the
resulting SQL query (given the original was SELECT * FROM users WHERE
username='[input]' AND password='[input]') and explain precisely WHY the
attacker is authenticated without knowing the password.
[5 marks]
6. Compare a ConfigMap and a Secret in Kubernetes. Give one valid use case for
each, and explain why you should NOT store database passwords in a ConfigMap.
[5 marks]
7. In Terraform, what is the difference between an implicit dependency and an explicit
dependency? Provide a one-line code example of each.
[5 marks]
8. Define SSRF and explain how it bypasses access controls when the application
implicitly trusts requests from localhost or 127.0.0.1. Give one mitigation.
[5 marks]
9. The OWASP Password Storage Cheat Sheet recommends combining salting with a
work factor. Explain what each does, and why using ONLY salting (without a slow


--- PAGE 6 ---
hashing algorithm) is insufficient against modern GPU-based attacks.
[5 marks]
10. You discover that terraform.tfstate contains a plaintext database password
in a team Git repository. List THREE concrete remediation steps you would take, in
order of priority.
[5 marks]
11. Explain the role of an Ingress Controller in Kubernetes. Why might you choose an
NGINX-based Ingress over creating one LoadBalancer Service per microservice in a
system with 20 microservices?
[5 marks]
12. A web application encrypts credit card numbers in the database but decrypts
them automatically on every query. A SQL injection vulnerability is then discovered.
Explain why the encryption did NOT protect the data, and describe TWO design
changes that would have prevented exposure.
[5 marks]
— END OF EXAMINATION —
Review your answers before submitting. Partial credit is awarded for partial reasoning. Good luck.
